El Niño and La Niña are periodic disturbances
of the ocean-atmosphere system
that change weather patterns
around the world every few years.
The ocean surface is exposed to winds,
which help to drive the ocean currents.
In the tropical Pacific Ocean, the
trade winds blow from east to west.
Sea-Surface Temperature measured by satellites
In normal conditions,
the easterly trade winds
push warm ocean surface water
to the western Pacific Ocean.
Ocean Temperature
This draws cold, deep water to the surface
along the coast of South America.
This tongue of cooler water is nutrient rich,
providing food for an abundance of marine life.
During El Niño, the trade winds weaken,
causing a build up of warm water
in the eastern Pacific, suppressing
the upwelling of cold water.
Chlorophyll-a Concentration
Without upwelling nutrients,
phytoplankton populations collapse,
as shown by satellite
measurement of ocean colour.
This can dramatically reduce the
fish catch off the coast of South America.
Sea-Surface Temperature
The warmer water also expands,
causing differences in the height
of the sea surface that can
be measured from space.
This is another way of tracking the
distribution of warm water
and the severity of an El Niño event.
As warm water builds up so does cloud cover,
due to increased evaporation of sea water.
When El Niño ends, the cold water
sometimes returns stronger than ever,
clearing a gap in the clouds as the local
climate enters its cool phase – La Niña.
Soil Moisture Anomaly
These changes to ocean temperature
and evaporation over the Pacific
lead to changes in rainfall
trends across the world.
Certain areas can experience wetter
or drier conditions than normal,
which can lead to more flash floods,
drought or wildfires.
Fire Burned Area
drought 2007
floods 2008
heatwave 2010
floods 2011
drought 2012
drought 2015
fire 2015
ESA’s Climate Change Initiative uses Earth
observation satellites to monitor and
measure the effects of El Niño and La Niña
in the context of a changing global climate.
Data from
CCI Sea Surface Temperature, Ocean Colour,
Soil Moisture and Fire teams
ESA CryoSat ocean currents
Animation by
Planetary Visions